# Contacts and Mailing Lists

ICU uses several mailing lists for discussions, announcements and notifications.
The mailing list server provides web-based subscription with many options, list
archives, digest mode, etc. Please follow the links to the mailing lists you are
interested in.

*Note:* In order to post to the support or design lists you *must subscribe*
*first*- posts by non-members will be deleted. You can browse the list archives
without subscribing by following the links below, or [search the
archives](http://sourceforge.net/p/icu/mailman/search/).

When you subscribe to the lists, please make sure that the email address that
you are subscribing matches *exactly* the address that your email program is
using. Otherwise, your emails will not go through to the list. The mailing list
server matches addresses strictly, including case and the domain (server name)
part of addresses.

As a general rule of etiquette, please do not include confidential information
or mark your e-mails as urgent. These are public mailing lists used by many
volunteers. The volunteers will try to answer your question as soon as possible.

Do not send "Out of Office" messages to this list. They contribute nothing to
the discussion.

Subscription Mailing List List Description
[icu-support](http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/icu-support) ICU
C/C++/Java API discussions, support and platform specific issues (e.g.
downloading, compiling, linking, packaging, debugging, ICU API usage, ICU data,
etc.) [icu-announce](http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/icu-announce)
Contains important announcements about the ICU project, such as new releases.
Read-only.
[icu-design](http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/icu-design) This list
is for API proposals and their discussion.
*(If you have a problem building or question using ICU, do not use this list-
use icu-support instead.)*

You can **report a bug or request a new feature** with the [bug tracking
system](bugs.md). (This is not a mailing list, but a web-based bug tracking
system). If you have an ICU4C or ICU4J build problem, you will get a faster
response from the icu-support mailing list. Please do not use the icu-design
mailing list for build issues.
