# ICU 3.2 Archive

## Note: This an archive of a very old ICU release.

You can find copies of the downloads here:

*   3.2.1:
    *   [ICU4C 3.2.1](https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4C/3.2.1/)
*   3.2:
    *   [ICU4C 3.2](https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4C/3.2/) •
        [ICU4J 3.2](https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4J/3.2/) •
        [ICU4JNI
        3.2](https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4JNI/icu4jni/3.2/)

## Archived Content: (below links may not function)

---

### Description

ICU 3.2 is a major ("reference") release with new features, new and modified
APIs.

Major changes in ICU 3.2 include the following:

*   ICU locale data is now completely built from the [CLDR
    1.2](http://www.unicode.org/cldr/) data.
*   Major overhaul of ICU's Users Guide production tools. We now use [Open
    Office](http://www.openoffice.org/) and source files are publicly available.
*   Universal Timescale conversions.
*   Accept-Language support.
*   DateFormat and Calendar object initialization performance improvements.
*   Reduction in size of executables that statically link to ICU4C.
*   RFC 3066 support in Locale IDs for ICU4J
*   Additional platform ports for ICU4C
*   Bug fixes

### ICU4C Download

#### Release Date

2006-Feb-24

#### Source Code Download

Other than via these .tar and .zip files, the code is also tagged in
[SubVersion](/repository/) with release-3-2-1.

FileSizeDescription[icu4c-3.2.1.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2.1/icu4c-3.2.1.zip)10.8MBZIP
file for Windows
platforms[icu4c-3.2.1.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2.1/icu4c-3.2.1.tgz)9.6MBgzipped
tar archive for Unix and other
platforms[icu-3.2-docs.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-docs.zip)1.3MBZIP
file with the API
documentation[icu-3.2-userguide.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-userguide.zip)473KBZIP
file with the User Guide HTML documentation

#### Binary Distribution Download

Here are the binary distributions of the ICU libraries on our reference
platforms.

FileSizePlatform[icu-3.2-AIX5.2-VA.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-AIX5.2-VA6.tgz)6.2MBAIX
5.2 (PowerPC 64-bit) VisualAge
6[icu-3.2-HPUX11i-aCC.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-HPUX11i-aCC.tgz)6.0MBHP-UX
11i (B.11.11) (PA-RISC 64-bit) aCC
A.03.50[icu-3.2-LinuxRedHat9-gcc3.2.2.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-LinuxRedHat9-gcc3.2.2.tgz)5.3MBRed
Hat Linux 9.0 (x86 32-bit) gcc
3.2.2[icu-3.2-Solaris-CC6.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-Solaris-CC6.tgz)5.6MBSolaris
9 (Sparc 64-bit) Workshop
6.0[icu-3.2-Win32-msvc6.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-Win32-msvc6.zip)5.4MBWindows
(win32 x86 32-bit) Microsoft Visual Studio
6.0[icu-3.2-Win32-msvc7.1.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-Win32-msvc7.1.zip)5.5MBWindows
(win32 x86 32-bit) Visual Studio.Net
2003[icu-3.2-Win64-msvc6.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-Win64-msvc6.zip)6.5MBWindows
(IA64) Microsoft Visual Studio 6.0

#### Maintenance Release Notes

ICU4C 3.2.1 is a maintenance release of ICU4C 3.2. The primary features of this
release are:

*   Improved portability to Microsoft Visual Studio .NET 2005, z/OS, and several
    other platforms.
*   Improved scalability when using Unicode character properties.
*   Collation bug fixes for Thai

#### Platform Installation Notes

Please be sure to view the
[readme.html](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-2-1/readme.html)
that is included in ICU. Most installation questions can be answered there. The
z/OS (OS/390)
[unpax-icu.sh](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-2-1/as_is/os390/unpax-icu.sh)
script is required to unpackage the compressed tar file on z/OS, and the i5/OS
(OS/400)
[unpax-icu.sh](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-2-1/as_is/os400/unpax-icu.sh)
script is required to unpackage the compressed file on i5/OS.

#### Known Issues, Bugs and Patches

For the list of known issues with ICU4C 3.2.1 please see the [readme
file](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-2-1/readme.html)

ICU4C 3.2 mistakenly adds mutex locks to functions for case mapping properties,
which reduces performance and scalability in multithreaded systems where these
functions are used heavily. The [patch for this
issue](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/icu-3.2-patch.tgz)
fixes this issue (Ticket 4413). Software that calls ICU functions for
normalization or for character properties in a multithreaded environment must
call u_init() before doing so. See the u_init() API documentation and the readme
for details. Instructions on applying this patch are located on the [patch
instructions page](patch.html). This fix is included with ICU4C 3.2.1.

#### Older 3.2 Releases

Here are links to the older 3.2.*x*.

VersionDescription[3.2.0](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.2/)First
release

### ICU4J Download

#### Release Date

2004-Nov-22

#### Downloads

Other than via the jar files, the code is also tagged in
[SubVersion](/repository/) with release-3-2.

FileSizeDescription[icu4j_3_2.jar](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/3.2/icu4j_3_2.jar)3.0MBJar
file containing the class
files.[icu4jsrc_3_2.jar](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/3.2/icu4jsrc_3_2.jar)9.0MBJar
file containing the source
files.[icu4jdocs_3_2.jar](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/3.2/icu4jdocs_3_2.jar)1.0MBJar
file containing the api documentation.

#### Platform Installation Notes

Please be sure to view the
[readme.html](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu4j/tags/release-3-2/readme.html)
that is included in ICU. Most installation questions can be answered there.

#### Known Bugs and Patches

ICU4J 3.2 TimeZone code will not function properly in a Java2 Security context
(such as within a Servlet environment). This affects Calendars and Date
Formatting. ([Ticket 4608](http://bugs.icu-project.org/trac/ticket/4608)) This
bug has been fixed in ICU4J 3.4 and later. We are providing [a patch to ICU4J in
a zip
file](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/3.2/icu4j3201patch.zip)
to fix this issue. Instructions on applying this patch are located [on the ICU
patch page](patch.html), and the instructions are also found within the zip
file.

### ICU4JNI Download

#### Release Date

2004-Nov-22

#### Downloads

Other than via these ZIP files, the code is also tagged in
[SubVersion](/repository/) with release-3-2.

FileSizeDescription[icu4jnisrc3.2.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/icu4jni/3.2/icu4jnisrc3.2.zip)327KBZIP
file containing ICU4JNI source files

#### Known Issues, Bugs and Patches

For the list of known issues with ICU4JNI 3.2 please see the [readme
file](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu4jni/tags/release-3-2/readme.html)
