# ICU 3.6 Archive

## NOTE: This is an archive of a very old ICU release.

Use these links to find the source mentioned below:

*   ICU4C: <https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4C/>
*   ICU4J: <https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4J/>
*   ICU4JNI: <https://sourceforge.net/projects/icu/files/ICU4JNI/icu4jni/>

## Download ICU 3.6 release

---

### Description

ICU is the premier library for software internationalization. ICU 3.6 is a major
release of ICU, with new features, new APIs, and many bug fixes in data and
code.

Major changes in ICU 3.6 include the following:

*   **Unicode**: ICU uses and supports Unicode 5.0, which is the latest major
    release of Unicode. Unicode 5.0 will be used in many operating systems and
    applications, and this version of ICU is important maintain interoperability
    with these new operating systems and applications. More information about
    Unicode 5.0 can be found in the [Unicode press
    release](http://www.unicode.org/press/pr-ucd5.0.html).
*   **Locale Data**: ICU uses and supports data from [Common Locale Data
    Repository (CLDR) 1.4](http://www.unicode.org/press/pr-cldr1.4.html), which
    includes many improvements in quality and quantity of data. There is 25%
    more CLDR locale data in 245 locales in ICU.
*   **ICU4C Specific Changes**
    *   **Charset Detection**: A charset detection framework was added, which
        provides heuristics for detecting the charset for unlabeled sequences of
        bytes.
    *   **Layout**: The font layout engine has support added for Tibetan,
        Sinhala and Old Hangul.
    *   **BiDi**: The BiDi algorithm was enhanced to be more flexible and
        efficient
    *   **ICU Data Management**: The new icupkg tool provides an easier way to
        manage ICU's data library. This tool allows you to add, update or remove
        data from ICU's data archive.
    *   **Time Zones** The time zone data is modularized to allow easier
        building and updating of the data.
    *   **Word Boundaries**: The Thai word break iteration was improved to be
        more accurate. Also dictionary based detection of Thai word boundaries
        is now active for all locales.
    *   **UText**
        *   The BreakIterator uses UText for abstract text processing.
        *   64-bit indexing is now used to allow access to larger chunks of
            text.
        *   API for read-only locking for security and robustness was added.
    *   **Performance**
        *   The u_sprintf/u_sscanf performance from the icuio library has been
            improved for number formatting/parsing.
        *   Constructing a DateFormat is significantly faster for many locales.
        *   Opening and closing a charset converter is significantly faster.
        *   The UTF-8 transformation functions and macros are faster.
        *   The UText API was improved for performance.
        *   The collation open and close functions have a small performance
            improvement.
*   **ICU4J Specific Changes**
    *   **Globalization Preferences**: A new flexible container for locale data
        was added.
    *   **Formatting**: A **preview** of flexible date/time format generator has
        been added. This allows multiple date and time format patterns to be
        generated that are valid for specific locales.
    *   **Charset Conversion**: A **preview** of the ICU4J implementation of the
        java.nio.charset.Charset API was added.

*Note: Do not use preview APIs in production code. They may change drastically
in subsequent releases.*

### ICU4C Download

#### Release Date

2006-Sep-01

#### Source Code Download

In addition to these .tar and .zip files, the code is also tagged in
[SubVersion](/repository/) with release-3-6.

FileSizeDescription[icu4c-3_6-src.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-src.zip)10.6
MBZIP file for Windows
platforms[icu4c-3_6-src.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-src.tgz)9.8
MBgzipped tar archive for Unix and other
platforms[icu4c-3_6-docs.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-docs.zip)2.6MBZIP
file with the API
documentation[icu-3_6-userguide.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu-3_6-userguide.zip)2.1MBZIP
file with the User Guide documentation

#### Binary Distribution Download

Here are the binary distributions of the ICU libraries on our reference
platforms.

FileSizePlatform[icu4c-3_6-AIX5_2-VA6.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-AIX5_2-VA6.tgz)7.2MBAIX
5.2 (PowerPC 64-bit) VisualAge
6[icu4c-3_6-HPUX11i-aCC.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-HPUX11i-aCC.tgz)6.8MBHP-UX
11i (B.11.11) (PA-RISC 64-bit) aCC
A.03.50[icu4c-3_6-RHEL4_2-gcc3_4_5.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-RHEL4_2-gcc3_4_5.tgz)6.0MBRed
Hat Enterprise Linux 4.2 (x86 32-bit) gcc
3.4.5[icu4c-3_6-Solaris-CC8.tgz](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-Solaris-CC8.tgz)6.9MBSolaris
9 (Sparc 64-bit) Forte
8.0[icu4c-3_6-Win32-msvc7_1.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/3.6/icu4c-3_6-Win32-msvc7_1.zip)6.1MBWindows
(win32 x86 32-bit) Visual Studio.Net 2003 (MSVC 7.1)

#### Platform Installation Notes

Please be sure to view the
[readme.html](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-6/readme.html)
that is included in ICU. Most installation questions can be answered there. The
z/OS (OS/390)
[unpax-icu.sh](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-6/as_is/os390/unpax-icu.sh)
script is required to unpackage the compressed tar file on z/OS, and the i5/OS
(OS/400)
[unpax-icu.sh](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-6/as_is/os400/unpax-icu.sh)
script is required to unpackage the compressed file on i5/OS.

The ICU4C 3.6 source downloads contains a pre-built .dat data archive with ICU's
data rather than the data source files. This is to simplify the build process
for the majority of users and to reduce platform porting issues. If you need the
data source files for customization, then please download the ICU source code
from [SubVersion repository](/repository/). If you need to remove data from
ICU's data library, you can also consider using the new icupkg tool to modify
the data built into ICU.

#### Known Issues, Bugs and Patches

For the list of known issues with ICU4C 3.6 please see the [readme
file](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu/tags/release-3-6/readme.html).

### ICU4J Download

#### Release Date

2007-Apr-30

#### Downloads

In addition to these .jar, the code is also tagged in [SubVersion](/repository/)
with release-3-6-1.

FileSizeDescription[icu4j_3_6_1.jar](http://download.icu-project.org/files/icu4j/3.6.1/icu4j_3_6_1.jar)3.9MBJar
file containing
binaries.[icu4j-charsets_3_6_1.jar](http://download.icu-project.org/files/icu4j/3.6.1/icu4j-charsets_3_6_1.jar)2.3MBJar
file containing binaries for
charsets.[icu4jsrc_3_6_1.jar](http://download.icu-project.org/files/icu4j/3.6.1/icu4jsrc_3_6_1.jar)12.3
MBJar file containing the
sources.[icu4jdocs_3_6_1.jar](http://download.icu-project.org/files/icu4j/3.6.1/icu4jdocs_3_6_1.jar)1.2
MBJar file containing the documentation.

#### Platform Installation Notes

Please be sure to view the
[readme.html](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu4j/tags/release-3-6-1/readme.html)
that is included in ICU4J. Most installation questions can be answered there.

### ICU4JNI Download

#### Release Date

2006-Oct-01

#### Downloads

In addition to this .zip, the code is also tagged in [SubVersion](/repository/)
with release-3-6.

FileSizeDescription[icu4jni-3_6-src.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/icu4jni/3.6/icu4jni-3_6-src.zip)352
KBZip file containing the
sources.[icu4jni-3_6-docs.zip](ftp://ftp.software.ibm.com/software/globalization/icu/icu4j/icu4jni/3.6/icu4jni-3_6-docs.zip)136
KBZip file containing the API documentation.

#### Platform Installation Notes

Please be sure to view the
[readme.html](http://source.icu-project.org/repos/icu/icu4jni/tags/release-3-6/readme.html)
that is included in ICU4JNI. Most installation questions can be answered there.
